The goal of this video is to discuss prime factorization and implementing that in Python.
This is a great opportunity to utilize your newfound knowledge on Python dictionaries that you acquired
in a previous video.
So before talking about prime factorization I'd like to start by giving you a reminder of what it means
to be a prime number. A prime number is an integer that is divisible only by itself and by one.
So here you see a few examples.
Two is not divisible by any number other than itself and 1.
Same thing for 3 and 5 and 7 and hot is 8 a prime number.
Well you can probably guess that is not a prime number because otherwise I wouldn't have colored it
in red instead of blue.
But of course it is not a prime number: eight is divisible by itself and by 1.
However 8 is also divisible by other numbers like 2 and 4.
So with that in mind, the idea of prime factorization is to break down a number, or factorize it, to
represent that number as the multiplication of the product of other numbers that are all prime numbers.
So each of those individual numbers are called multiplicands.
For example, the number 8 can be represented as the product of two times two times two.
Of course two times two is four times two is eight and each of these numbers is a prime number.
Likewise, twenty five can be expressed as five times five, and five is a prime number.
48, we're starting to get to even more prime numbers here.
So 48 can be expressed as two times two times two times two times three.
And I encourage you not to trust me and to pause the video and work through the arithmetic yourself.
OK so let's switch to Python and see how prime factorization works and how these numbers are represented.
So we are going to need these sympy module here.
So I start by importing that module.
So let's pick a number let's say number equals about forty eight.
That was the example I showed in the slides.
So I'm going to compute the prime factorization using sym dot factor int.
So this is the function for computing the prime factorization.
So you want the prime factorization of the number.
And notice that the output here looks an awful lot like a dictionary.
In fact, it is a dictionary! So let's call this fact or dict equals this and then just to show you that
this really is a dictionary, let's say the type of this variable and it is of course a dictionary.
All right.
And I'm going to print this out.
So what do we see here?
How can we decode this dictionary?
So remember that a dictionary contains key value pairs.
So the key and then the values are after the colon.
So we have the keys are two and three and the values are four and 1.
Now thinking back to the slide, remember that the number 48 can be represented using the product of prime
numbers as two times two times two times two times three.
So we get four times the number two and one times the number three.
Okay.
So let's try again for example with five and now we see that this dictionary only has one key, which
is five, and that number five only appears once. Not that surprising.
All right.
So let me go back to how about eight.
We can see eight is three twos.
So two times two times two.
Actually, you know,
let's go back to 48 because I want there to be multiple keys here.
So if I just want to know what are the prime numbers that are in this number 48 regardless of how many
times they appear.
All I need to do is extract the keys from this dictionary and I can do that by typing dot keys.
I use this method in the object in this in this dictionary to extract the keys and that tells me that
there is the number two and the number three those are the two keys.
So this is the variable type, here's the dictionary keys.
If I want just the actual numbers I can convert this into a list and now I get a list of numbers that
correspond to the keys, which correspond to the prime factors of this number.
Okay.
So let me go back and just show this one more time. I'm going to talk a little bit more about this output
here and how to interpret it.
So remember this number is not a prime number.
And the way that we can tell that it's not a prime number from looking at the prime factorization is
to see that it has more than one key.
OK.
But that's not entirely satisfactory, because we also saw that the number eight, which is not a prime
number has only one key.
However, the number eight has one key but it is a key that repeats three times; it has a value of greater
than one.
In contrast, the number seven, which is a prime number, has only one key and the number one appears as
as the value of that key. And so with that hint in mind, the exercise for this video is to loop through
the integers from two through 50 and determine whether each of these integers from two to 50 is a prime
number or a composite number.
So a composite number is basically just an integer that is not a prime number.
So here you see two and three are prime numbers, four is not a prime number it's a composite number and
the prime factors are in this case there is just one of them and it's two.
So this is the screen that you want to print out. So you're certainly going to need a for loop to loop
through all of these integers and the way that I solved it is using the following function.
So factorint of course you need.
I also used list and Len for length, if else, and print. Maybe you will come up with some other solutions
that don't rely on these functions... the way that you solve it doesn't matter.
But the goal of the exercise is basically to print out this.
This is obviously not all of it.
This goes all the way down to 50.
OK.
So good luck, pause the video.
And now I'm going to switch to Python and show you how I would go about solving this problem.
So let us begin by generating the integers.
There's going to be a range from two through... I write fifty one here because in fact I want the numbers
to go up to 50.
So let's say for num i in num, maybe I'll call this number because this is plural; there's a bunch of
them.
So num I for the i-th number in this range.
Numbers.
So the first thing I'm going to do is run a prime factorization so I'll call that di for dictionary
and that's going to be sym dot factorinit.
And then I.
So far nothing particularly new or exciting.
That's exactly what I did up here and now what I want to do is extract the keys from this dictionary.
So list D I
keys and maybe I'll even just stop right here and print out the keys.
So what this is going to do is do the prime factorization and extract the keys and print them out... oops.
This should be num i
.
Okay.
So here are all of the prime numbers that multiplied to create the numbers to go through and three and
four all the way down to 50.
Okay.
Now this doesn't tell us whether each of these things is a prime number.
I just wanted to run this first to make sure that I haven't already made any errors, which of course
I already did here, I wrote I instead of number I.
OK so how do we go about doing this.
We need to test two things at the same time: we need to test whether the length of the dictionary is
1 and if the length is 1 then we need to test whether the value at that first element in the dictionary
with it with the first key is of length 1.
OK.
So let me write this out and then I will explain it again to make sure it's clear.
So we say if the length of the dictionary is 1 and if the dictionary.
And now I want to access the first element in the dictionary using the first key so that's going to
be keys 0 corresponding to the first key in the dictionary.
And if that value associated with the first key is 1 then that means that there is 1 prime number and
that prime number appears exactly once.
And that means we're working with a prime number.
So then if that's the case then we can say print and then it's going to be this number.
So percent G is a prime number.
And then that present G gets replaced with numi.
So I want to run this code first and make sure that all of this works.
So we get to is a prime number three five seven.
Okay.
This all looks great.
Now I don't have memorized in my head all of the prime numbers, although it is pretty easy to check because
the only prime number that is an even number is two.
All the other prime numbers in our universe are odd numbers.
Okay.
Good.
So the code is still working so far.
Now if this is not the case of either one of these is not true then we are not working with a prime
number.
So then we want to say that this number.
Percent g is a composite number with prime factors and then I'm going to say again percent
S and now I want to list out the actual keys...
First we need to replace this percent g with the numbers that's numi.
And then we want the keys from the dictionary.
And that is di.
So that's D I dot keys.
All right.
And now... a bit of a drumroll... I think this is going to be good.
This looks kind of good.
This is not totally satisfactory but actually let's check that it's working well first.
So first of all we can see all of the numbers are present from two all the way down to 50 and then we
can see for these composite numbers we have the prime factors two and five.
This one is just seven.
That makes sense because forty nine is seven times seven and seven is a prime number which you can see
here.
All right.
So this is getting better.
The thing that I don't like is how this is printed out dictionary keys or dict keys here.
So you might remember that I showed you that you can make a list of these keys, so let's do that. So I'm
going to encase this in the list function and....
now this is starting to look good.
In fact this looks great.
I would say this is the end of the assignment.
So I hope you enjoyed this video.
I certainly enjoyed creating it.
You learned how to factor a number into primes.
So prime factorization and you also learned how to write an algorithm that determines whether a number
is prime or composite.